import AsciinemaPlayer from '@/components/asciinema-player';
import Figure from "@/components/figure";

# Writing this Blog

<Figure
  src="/images/large-logo.png"
  width="1024"
  height="1024"
  classes="lg:w-6/12 lg:float-right lg:mx-4"
  alt="Title" />

<p className="text-xl mb-4">_Created: 2024-01-03_</p>

In the first post on this site, as seems semi-traditional, I talk about how this
site came to being and the technology behind how this site works and my
experiences of using them.

The codebase for this site can be found as a read-only copy at
https://github.com/strottos/strottos.dev-public, PR's will most likely not be
accepted without good reason but I encourage people to raise any issues they
like there. The GitHub actions CI has been redacted on that repository for
security reasons, but the remainder of the codebase should be in tact.

## Reasons for Existence

There are essentially the following reasons this blog exists:
1. I think I have learned a lot over my years as a Software Engineer, Platform
   Engineer and other disciplines and I like sharing knowledge.
2. I've spent a lot of time helping train engineers in the last few years, and
   I'd like to be able to stop repeating myself and point people to blog posts
   and maybe even videos in time.
3. Teaching is the best way to know if you understand something.
4. It's a showcase of my talents/ability. Isn't it for everyone?
5. It was a chance for me to finally learn frontend development.

I'll expand on each of these points briefly now.

### Lot's to Give

Firstly I think I've a lot to give, I doubt I'll ever write everything that's
currently in my head to post here, let alone the things that might occur to me
in the future. In my time I've learned a lot about coding generally, about using
both UNIX and now Windows systems to be productive, about deploying things to
production and various good practices around all these and more. I have well
over 10 years experience in some kind of IT engineering as well as a PhD in Pure
Mathematics and two Masters degree's in some form of Maths and Physics.

### Experienced Teacher/Trainer

One thing I've learned over the past few years is that I'm quite good at
explaining things. At least basing this on feedback I've received over the years
I'm hoping this to be true.

In some sense this is an experiment to see how well I can replace personal time
with me. My experience of training engineers has been that in times that I've
been fortunate enough to spend one-on-one time with them that tends to be the
most productive and I've had generally good feedback from doing this. Of course
the downside of one-on-one time is that it takes up my time which I don't always
have lots of at present. Additionally to this, probably training engineers is
one of my favourite parts of my job, I certainly don't see this as a replacement
for that kind of thing but maybe it can help.

I think one of the insights I've been lucky enough to gain in the past few years
is what some people struggle with when they're learning something as well. This
is another real tangible benefit of one-on-one training, people don't have to
sit at the back and pretend they understand, they can really tell you what they
don't understand. One of the things I think is difficult sometimes is knowing
where to focus energy. Take learning to become a Platform Engineer for example,
that's a huge undertaking for someone new to the field but people are very much
trying to do that, and under the assumption that we're not all about to be
replaced by AI (at least not just yet) why shouldn't they? But it's hard to
figure out what you don't know when you don't know it. I was really fortunate to
have been surrounded by really good people who knew a lot when I first started
and they taught a lot of it to me. Plus I genuinely think there was less to
learn in 2006 when I first started on my path to being an engineer and I got
away with Google to a large extent. These days I think there's so much that
knowing what to Google is a bit challenge. I'm hoping this can help engineers
with that vital skill.

Lastly here, I think I'm well aware of what it's like to sit and not understand
something thanks to the multitude of seminars I've sat in as a Maths PhD
student. Whilst I'm sure they were very good, I probably wasn't as good a
mathematician as some and got left behind at times (probably one of the reasons
I became a software engineer really). I've seen the same thing happen a lot in
IT too where the [curse of knowledge cognitive
bias](https://thedecisionlab.com/reference-guide/management/curse-of-knowledge)
becomes highly non-productive. I think I'm reasonably good at not falling under
this bias, though I'm keenly aware I'm still effected by it as we all are. I'm
hoping that some of these articles are easier to follow than some others might
be that are written by the true "experts" in a particular field (though I won't
be writing much about things I don't know about, and in those cases I will be
clear that I'm new to them, like this article for example).

### Training Myself

I think we've all been there when we think we understand something but then
realise we don't. I've often found when I teach something is when I truly learn
how something works. Sometimes when explaining something I realise I don't know
exactly how something works (or at least can't remember) and I have to go back
to the drawing board a little bit. This is a really good thing for me and
something that I suspect people in most disciplines should strive for.

### Branding

This is my least favourite reason for doing this but it's factually correct. I'm
sure that if everyone is honest this is at least part of the reason for doing
something like this and whilst I might be a bit embarrassed it's true, I won't
apologise for it but I truly hope this isn't the only thing to come out of this.

### Teaching Myself Frontend Development

To the last point, my background is largely as a Software Engineer (backend
focussed) and a Platform Engineer (or SRE or DevOps Engineer or Cloud Engineer
or whatever you want to call it) but not really as a frontend developer. I've
certainly done my share of frontend, and I like to think of myself as reasonably
full-stack, but the fact is frontend is my weakest point and I wanted to improve
my skills here. Now I've no doubt experts in frontend will look at some things
I've done and say to themselves "that's not great" as I have known myself do
when I look at things others have done when I "know better". Regardless, this
was the best job I could do at the time of writing and I'm really proud of how
it turned out.

## Outline of History

OK, so how did I make this happen (finally). Well this has been in the works for
probably at least a year now but went through various pause stages for various
reasons. I realised earlt that I could deploy a website without too much
difficulty at pretty low cost (unless it becomes super popular I guess), but I
wasn't sure how to write the frontend.

Things I was keen on at the time:
* I wanted to be able to write blog posts straight to a Git repo, push it and
have it auto-deploy itself. It was important that when writing blog posts I
could use my standard dev setup (largely NeoVim in a terminal) and not have
things like development or deployment get in the way of writing blog posts.
* I wanted to showcase existing skills and learn new skills. In particular, I
didn't want to just take something off-shelf even though that would have been
quicker.
* I wanted this to stand out a little bit. No ads, anything I wanted I could do,
that kind of thing.
* I wanted it to be hosted on the cheap and to be cool.
* I wanted changes to be easily testable.

My first thought was (knowingly full well that it may end badly) can I write it
in Rust as that would be the most fun, entertainment value counts here. Whilst
that may sound completely wild I knew that you could compile Rust to WASM but
didn't know how feasible it was. Another benefit was I'd learn a bit about that
technology too, worth a punt I figured.

For reasons to be outlined below this failed. I did manage to write something
working and got it deployed to AWS and I believe I'd have got it right in time
in time but I ran out of time and energy for this, work got really busy as it
does.

Many months then passed again until I found myself explaining Git rebasing for
the not first time. I thought about putting such an article on
[dev.to](https://dev.to) as I'd done previously (personally I loathe Medium for
reasons I won't go into here and refused to use them. Then I thought I've been
meaning to brush up on React so I decided to look into using that. As far as
sensibility goes it's clearly more battle tested than the Rust option.

After a couple of months of plugging away I finally got what I wanted and you're
currently viewing the end product. I deployed a NextJS app where I'm writing the
articles using MDX (JSX but for markdown) and deployed to CloudFlare pages as a
statically generated site.

## Experience of Writing it in Rust and WASM

<Figure
  src="/images/posts/writing-this-blog/old-blog.jpg"
  width="1024"
  height="1024"
  classes="lg:w-144 lg:float-right lg:shadow lg:mx-4"
  alt="Old Rust/WASM Blog"
  caption="Figure 1: Old Rust/WASM Blog" />

Whilst my memory of this part of the process was a while back I will do my best
to recall the details.

The rough process was:
* I wrote a basic webpage with a left nav, a footer and some basic content in
the middle;
* I deployed it to AWS in an S3 bucket with a CloudFront distribution in front
of that and other supporting infrastructure;
* I had to write some code for handling the parsing of a markdown file and
displaying it on the site.

Figure 1 is a screenshot of the status that it got to (that just took me a while
to get running as it happens) after which point I ran out of time and energy and
stopped working on it for a while (let's hope that doesn't happen again, but it
may do, time will tell).

### Writing the Basic Webpage

This initially involved me relearning some basics of frontend like HTML and CSS
as it had been a while since I'd done much in these areas. After this I had a
rough idea of what I wanted, something pretty simple to start with where I had a
photo of me, a footer with my Email, GitHub and LinkedIn links.

It unfortunately wasn't responsive and I hadn't spent much time looking into how
to do this kind of thing properly, it sure didn't look great on mobile.

After this I had to choose some basic technology. I'd already settled on Rust
(to be cool :doh:) and WASM and I found a few things that would help with this.
I settled on using [Yew](https://yew.rs/) which was probably the most well known
at the time. I had also trialled using [Leptos](https://leptos.dev/) but it
seemed to not be quite as mature at the time (at least that's my recollection,
it could well have improved by now as well).

Once I had the basic design done it was pretty straightforward to get it into
Yew as Yew is very much the Rust communities version of React. In fact this
works really nicely with Rust's macro system, where sometimes I've criticised
Rust macros this is an excellent use case of them.

### Deploying to AWS

So I had the basic static webpage now that compiled into a WASM file and I
wanted to find the best way of deploying this to a cloud.

As a Platform Engineer I was very used to Azure cloud at the time and also had
some experience in AWS as well. I chose to use AWS at the time for two reasons,
I thought it would be cheaper than Azure and I needed to learn a bit of AWS as
that was going to be the technology on my next project at work.

I figured out reasonably quickly that the easiest way to do this was to deploy
the WASM to an S3 bucket and I put that behind a CloudFront distribution largely
to be more secure. This along with the plumbing to setup HTTPS and Route53 was
setting me back about 60p (British pence) a month, on an extreme month (to be
fair I probably got about 0 traffic) it might be 61p. This was practically
entirely the 50p + tax that the Route 53 hosted zone was costing me, the rest
was basically nothing (don't let anybody tell you cloud always ends up more
expensive than on premise, it all depends).

This seemed to work quite well but then I had to figure out a nice way of making
this a bit more dynamic.

I also had this fully automated with an Azure DevOps workflow that would compile
Rust code and deploy using Terraform to a code bucket but it took a long time to
compile as I had to install [trunk](https://trunkrs.dev/) every time I made a
change which took a long time.

### Writing the Markdown Handling Code

This is where things got a bit trickier, everything worked great until I needed
to generate HTML from Markdown.

The first thing I thought was can I just get something to statically generate at
build time the HTML needed from markdown and then use that. The problem here is
that it would regenerate the whole WASM again for the whole site and if I get
enough blog posts then (presumably) we'd get a bigger and bigger site that's all
or nothing. Not necessarily the end of the world for a small blog, and probably
a pointer to something I already knew, that WASM wasn't the right tech here.

The other option was to dynamically get the markdown from an API and dynamically
generate the HTML from there in the WASM. This would have worked and solved the
above problem and I did manage to get an AWS Lambda deployed written in Rust
that served this purposes with the surrounding infrastructure required. It
worked, but it wasn't great and needed more work.

It was similarly automated and would deploy automatically every time we made a
change on the `main` branch.

## Experience of Rewriting it Using NextJS

<Figure
  src="/images/posts/writing-this-blog/new-site-initial-mobile.jpg"
  width="1024"
  height="1024"
  classes="mx-auto w-11/12 lg:w-64 lg:float-right mb-6 lg:mb-2 shadow lg:mx-4"
  alt="New Site Original Design"
  caption="Figure 2: New Site Original Design Mobile" />

<Figure
  src="/images/posts/writing-this-blog/new-site-initial.jpg"
  width="1024"
  height="1024"
  classes="mx-auto w-11/12 lg:w-144 lg:float-right mb-6 lg:mb-2 shadow lg:mx-4"
  alt="New Site Original Design"
  caption="Figure 3: New Site Original Design" />

Then when it came to look at NextJS I decided to rewrite this blog site from
scratch. Some simple things had changed in what I wanted and essentially all I
had previously was a "proof of concept" at best, it certainly wasn't what you
would consider production ready if doing professionally.

### Writing the Basic Webpage

I was never really happy with the original design so I ended up starting again.
I read up a lot about producing responsive websites and finally figured out how
to do this kind of thing, in my case using [Tailwind
CSS](https://tailwindcss.com/). Tailwind CSS is excellent in my opinion
incidentally, this feels like how I always wanted CSS to be when you're using
reusable components like we do in things like React.

I ended up producing something like the above sites in Figures 2 & 3,
particularly from Figure 2 you can see I made a bit more effort to be
responsive. However, I wasn't really happy with this still, the left nav seemed
to be a bad choice to me in the end (not just become of the squashed image that
I've since abandoned). Most blogs I was looking at that looked a bit more modern
seemed to have moved away from this and towards a header at the top. I tried
moving the header to the top and was a lot happier with how it looked. The
hamburger menu for mobile I already had which was pieced together from bits I'd
done previously and I was pretty happy with that.

I also got DALL-E to generate some images like the cloud image that you see
above (at least at time of writing) which then kind of dictated the colour
scheme (and I was quite happy for it to do so to be honest, I didn't want to get
bogged down in this for something that is just a personal blog).

After a while I ended up with something closer to what you currently see (sure
it's been tweaked since but the basic premise was there).

### Rewrite in NextJS and Deploying to CloudFlare

Once I had the basic webpage I needed to rework it so that we were using NextJS.
I'd also looked at Remix and a couple of other options but settled on NextJS
purely because it seemed to be more popular and thus probably more useful.

The good news about NextJS though was that it was really easy to deploy using
CloudFlare (I'm pretty sure Remix would be similar). You can hook the github
repository up yourself and it'll just take care of everything for you. I wanted
a big more control than that so I'm deploying it myself through my own GitHub
actions which was pretty quick to write and seems to be working well for me. I
used the instructions
[here](https://developers.cloudflare.com/pages/framework-guides/deploy-a-nextjs-site/)
for creating the bare bones and added on top of that basically.

I decided early on that a static website seemed best and was worth the effort of
going to as I couldn't see any reason I'd need any dynamic content based on data
from a server, also this was slightly further outside my comfort zone and this
is a good thing.

My experience of NextJS was that separating between client and server components
was the most frustrating part and figuring out how to use one vs the other in
different parts was difficult. Sometimes what you do in an `npm run dev` doesn't
work when you run a full build with `npm run pages:build` because you've put
fontawesome icons in a server component and it doesn't warn you. Part of the
problem here was that I was using the new app router in NextJS (as recommended)
but the whole internet gives answers to questions based on the old pages router,
even a lot of new pages.

A good example of this was building the component to list posts that can
optionally take a tag and only display those tags. It was really difficult
figuring out how to do this and I realised after half a day of getting
frustrated it's because it can't (easily) use JS you write in the browser. My
thinking was it should be possible for me to provide a single static list of all
posts and I should be able to get the client side browser to narrow that out
based on a tag (or even tags). Obviously I couldn't use a server to do this as
there isn't a server (less I go to middleware which I didn't want to do, part of
the challenge). Eventually I got it to statically generate a post listing page
per tag that we have and that worked great, but it was difficult following the
documentation in NextJS on this kind of thing.

### Writing Markdown in MDX

Apart from this, I had a pretty positive experience with NextJS and React and
the site turned out well. One of the big plus points for me was MDX.

Originally I had a plan for Markdown that I would generate `jsx` pages pre-build
time from markdown files, similar I was doing on the previous Rust/WASM blog.
Then I found out about MDX which is brilliant. In a nutshell I can now write a
markdown file and get that to just automatically display, if I do want something
in it that requires HTML/CSS though I can still do that, something like this
displays the `Figure` component I wrote for example:

```
<Figure
  src="/images/large-logo.png"
  width="1024"
  height="1024"
  classes="lg:w-6/12 lg:float-right lg:mx-4"
  alt="Title" />
```

This was taken from the top of this document incidentally.

This seems really extensible too and at the time of writing I've only really
scratched the surface. I look forward to seeing what else I can do with this in
time.

### Asciinema

<AsciinemaPlayer
  cast="writing-this-blog/btm-process.cast"
  classes="w-full lg:w-6/12 xl:w-3/12 pl-4 pt-2 xl:float-right"
  caption="Figure 4: Output from `btm` Process" />

Another big plus point of writing my own site, given the total control I know
have is that if I want to do something it's just a case of can I figure out how
to do it.

One example of this, I wanted to be able to show terminal videos but without the
big overhead of having to make a video and get people to download large files.
In comes Asciinema, I've certainly read articles of people claiming they don't
like it but I can see how this could really help me in some articles, so I wrote
a react component for showing Asciinema which I can add in by just doing the
following:

```
<AsciinemaPlayer
  cast="writing-this-blog/btm-process.cast"
  classes="w-full lg:w-6/12 xl:w-3/12 pl-4 pt-2 xl:float-right"
  caption="Figure 2: Setup Git Repository in Terminal" />
```

This example is taken from the article I'm writing on Git merging and rebasing.
Here's an example of `btm` running on my machine in Figure 4. At the time of
writing we see that Asciinema is not perfect, but `btm` is a pretty complex TUI
and it's still not a bad effort showing that in a JS library.

## Lessons Learned

### CloudFlare is Great

As mentioned above, deploying through CloudFlare is an absolute pleasure,
especially (and probably mostly) when using technologies that they explicitly
support. I've moved the DNS for [strottos.dev](https://strottos.dev) to
CloudFlare from AWS, and that has become so much easier to handle now.

CloudFlare even have a Terraform plugin which I'm using to deploy this.

### How to Create Images

One of the things that largely put me off doing frontend work for many years was
not writing HTML or CSS or JS (though I still find CSS frustrating) but also
when you're going to write something like this yourself you need to think about
web design, images, layouts, fonts, lots of things that by and large neither
interest me nor align with my skillsets.

The mountain of Generative AI tools around now made a difference here. DALL-E
was absolutely brilliant at generating pure images and absolutely terrible at
putting text around them, plus to generate technical diagrams I still needed
something but between [draw.io](https://diagrams.net) (as everyone still seems
to call it) and [Figma](https://www.figma.com/) I seem to be doing OK so far.
Figma has a free plan which is really good for this kind of thing, I've not done
much in it so far but it seems excellent.
